Dia 1 - 10/03/2026
É hora de definir o risc-v, vou começar pelo hardware e depois vou para as instruções e então volto no hardware pra definir o encapsulamento dos métodos.
O RV32I tem 32 registradores do tipo i32, sendo o x0 sempre 0
Além dos 32 registradores, também temos o PC (Program Counter), responsável por apontar para a próxima instrução na memória, o PC também é i32.
A memória não é especificada, pode ter qualquer tamanho porque não faz parte da ISA, por hora só dá pra saber que ela é um array de u8
Acho que deve ter como por o tamanho da memória devendo ser passado por flag de execução e tendo um valor pequeno por default tipo 64Kb...
Por hora, a struct VM está assim: struct VM { x: [u8; 32], pc: u32, ram: [u8; 65536] } com estados mais limitados pelos tipos naturalmente.
O próximo passo é ter uma visão geral das instruções para então ver o passo a passo do fetch, decode e execute de cada uma delas em cada formato.

Dia 2 - 11/03/2026
As instruções tem tipos base e 32 bits de tamanho, o que significa incremento do pc em 4. Os tipos são R, I, S, B, U e J.
Pelo que entendi, o opcode são sempre os 7 bits mais baixos, fazendo com que o decode seja opcode = instr & 0x7F.
O fetch lê quatro bytes na memória começando no endereço do pc e aí vai pc + 1, pc + 2 e pc + 3 e então pc += 4.
O decode começa olhando os 7 bits mais baixos, que representam o opcode. opcode = instr & 0x7F.
Então o decode extrai os campos padrão sempre da mesma forma:
rd     = (instr >> 7)  & 0x1F
funct3 = (instr >> 12) & 0x7
rs1    = (instr >> 15) & 0x1F
rs2    = (instr >> 20) & 0x1F
funct7 = (instr >> 25) & 0x7F

A tabela abaixo informa o tipo da instrução
| opcode  | formato  |
| ------- | -------- |
| 0110011 | R        |
| 0010011 | I        |
| 0000011 | I (load) |
| 0100011 | S        |
| 1100011 | B        |
| 0110111 | U        |
| 0010111 | U        |
| 1101111 | J        |
| 1100111 | I (jalr) |

Então, ocorre uma sequencia de match, começando com match opcode, depois match das functs 
e finalmente o retorno das operações para o execute, transformando 4 bytes em um Instr::Add por exemplo.
Depois tenho que ver como funcionam os immediates de cada tipo, eles parecem ser meio chatos de extrair.

Acredito que agora já dê para formalizar essa síntese em um riscv.md que guiará passo a passo da implementação em Rust.

Day 3 - 12/03/2026 (dd/mm/yyyy)
Today is time to start using my English writting skills to practice it, if I don't start forcing myself English using, it'll never improve...
Today is also time to make my own Risc-v RV32I implementation guide to avoid being too dependant of AI to explain the requirements
I'll start with the virtual hardware and the fetch method, tomorrow I'll focus on decoding and listing all instructions
We should start smooth and slow... slow and steady to have constance! 
I made the readme in notion, I don't know if this content will really make part of readme or if I'll place it in another .md document but for now is it.
Tomorrow, I'll make the definitions of each VM Method, explaining the responsabilities and step-by-step of how it should work. It'll make test cases easier.
I'm thinking about dividing it in three structs: RV, CPU and VM were RV contains CPU that contains VM or something in this way... 
RV is the main struct, it'll worry about initializing and running everything;
CPU will worry about the logic evolving instructions and fetch-decode-execute cycle and how to use the VM methods to execute all instructions correctly;
VM is the Virtual Machine (obviously), so it's also a state machine that doesn't know anything about the state changing logic, it just worry about states
and the safe state transition. VM should make impossible to access an invalid state and should carry about the correct state transition.
Maybe it'll have an enum Error that contains CPUError and VMError for better error diagnostic, I'll see it soon...

Day 4 - 13/03/2026
I finished the VM specifications by describing each method of it. The next step is to describe the struct CPU and how its methods should work.
I'm using Notion to make the README.md because it's easier than writting markdown by hand. The Notion AI feedback is pretty useful to learn English writing.
The way I'm making this will make the code implementation practically mechanic, I'll just translate the README.md to Rust code and assert it's working
in the way as it should work.
I'll have to describe the Error enum and the errors inside each enum, but it'll be one of the last things to cover all cases...
Compile flags also have to be covered too.

Day 5 - 16/03/2026
I made the CPU attributes and general overview today. Making everything in a .md before making the code proved to be a great decision because I can see 
everything before start thinking in code and I can plan everything carefully.
Tomorrow I'll make the fetch method description.

Day 6 - 17/03/2026
Everything feels heavier since I stopped drinking cafeine 17 days ago, I'm making everything 10 times slower but the quality hasn't been afected.
Today I made the fetch method description and understood a bit about how bitwise works, it still a bit confuse but I'll learn it...

Day 7 - 18/03/2026
Today I made the first part of the decode method. I learned how to extract all necessary fields of the instruction to understand what the CPU should do.
Tomorrow I'll describe the pattern matching using opcode, funct3 and funct7 to identify which instruction in the Instruction enum it should return to the execute method.
Tomorrow I'll finally describe the instructions and the enum of the instructions, this will be the heart of all this documentation part!

Day 8 - 19/03/2026
Yeah, I used AI in that match code, it's HUGE! But all instructions are there... 
Tomorrow I'll make the Instruction enum in the execute method explanation. All state changes will be explained step-by-step, instruction by instruction!
I guess I'll understand better that part when I'm implementing it in rust by myself. That's why I'm making this huge documentation first, to make my own code.
I can see that I'll need a cpu folder with cpu.rs, decode.rs and execute.rs so it will not become a monster impossible to maintain and evolve.
AI suggested to add CSR in the project to run FreeRTOS later, but it requires more registers in the VM... It shouldn't grow too mutch before I start coding
but I think that only these registers are a good addition before start coding. 
Ok, tomorrow I have to make 2 things:
    1. Add CSR registers (and learn more about CSR...) in the VM with getters and setters
    2. Add execute method and Instruction enum into the CPU

Day 9 - 20/03/2026
I decided to make CSR instructions and registers in a next stage of the project.
This part is only for RV32I core, I should maintain the scope small and closed to
make a good code, then I can add more stuff like M, A, C, CSR etc...
Later I'll check the .md consistence and compare with the oficial spec (I'm using AI to search fast...)
The next step of this documentation is to add the GeneralError, VMError, CPUError and Instruction enums
The SYSTEM instructions will be reviewed in a next stage of the project, I'll decide the best way 
to implement Ecall and Ebreak instructions. FreeRTOS will run in my Risc-v emulator!
I decided to make this project in stages (RV32I, M, A, C, Zicsr, Zifencei) to not get drowned in theory, 
I need to strike a balance between planning and coding. Some of my projects have failed when I lost this balance.

Day 10 - 26/03/2026
I paused this project to focus on structuring my portfolio, resume and job stuff, now I can make both at the same day!
I'll start the code and adjust the .md after the code, I planned too mutch and it's time to implement it!
Anyways, only the enums and riscv struct was remaining to plan, I can make it after the code. The general architecture is already done!
Tomorrow I'll finally start the code with the VM struct!

Day 11 - 27/03/2026
Finally I'm starting the code! It will be faster and more organized than Chip-8 because I planned a lot of things before start coding.
Today I'll make the VM struct and the ways to define how mutch ram it will have in execution.
I decided to change vm ram to be a Vec<u8> instead of a [u8; N] because we should allow the user to decide the ram length in the compile flag
I made the initial structure of the entire project, RiscV contains CPU that contains VM, it's like an onion, I don't know if it's correct but 
apparently its maintainable and scalable.
The next step is to make the VM load the elf file in memory.
hmmm I discovered now that ELF files cannot be treated as a Vec<u8> because it has more information as pc entrypoint for example...
I'll have to make the read_elf function as a method of the RiscV struct and then pass the processed elf_file to CPU and CPU passes it to VM
Managing this ELF format is harder than I tought... ChatGPT is helping me with this part, I'll make the structs able to process ELF before start
making other methods
Next step is to make VM load the ELFImage in the memory and to make the CPU set PC initial position according to the ELFImage.

Day 12 - 31/03/2026
This ELF part is blocking the progress of the entire project! Once I forgot to plan it, I'm using Claude to solve this part for me
then I can keep it going by myself.
Actually I'm thinking about the use of AI in my projects... Is using AI to make the mechanic part (code) a problem when I understand everything?
For example, I ask ChatGPT to implement my VM architecture method by method, then I read and review the code, ask for some adjusts and tests... 
In my vision, it isn't dangerous for learning neither quality of the project. I'll test it to see if it works well, once its normal reviewing code
more than writting code... I just should understand everything and should be able to explain all parts of my own project.

Day 13 - 01/04/2026
Finally march have ended! I tought this month would take forever!
Ok, Today is the day to warantee that VM is working correctly. AI made methods to read and write u16 for RV32C, but I removed because the scope
for now is in RV32I, maybe I add the C extension in a next step... FreeRTOS doesn't need the C extension but maybe it is nice to have, I'll see...
ChatGPT is really fast making code, specially useful for tests! I'm reading everything.
Claude is useful for feedback, for example suggesting a better documentation with /// and feedback about my tests.
I see that it has some pattern to make things in a way that looks like a franchise... A software fabric franchise...
For example, always test some dimensions as impossible states giving errors, boundaries where it should keep working, normal use 
The cargo commands are also the same too: test, fmt, clippy and doc
The process of implementation consists in AI code generation, I review, tests, and then other AI reviews everything and provide a feedback
Everything happening based on my knowledge and critical assessment. I became a sort of coordinator, boss, leader, I don't know exactly...
PS: in general, I liked using AI, it accelerated a lot the work and saved me days (maybe weeks) of manual coding! 
I'll develop this "franchise model" and document it soon.

Day 14 - 02/04/2026
Today is day to make the CPU fetch and decode methods and ensure that all RV32I instructions are being recognized by my emulator.
I'll ensure that by giving an official test ELF and making my emulator to print all instructions on terminal.
This CPU module is a bit messy with cpu::cpu::CPU, I'll see how to simplify it later...
I noticed that checking if PC should be only % 4 is a CPU responsability, not a VM responsability. 
VM should only check if PC still pointing to a valid memory address.
Ok, is time to solve that enums VMError, CPUError, RiscVError and GeneralError, I need a way to propagate errors between these enums 
ChatGPT told me that I have to implement a trait called From... Let's see what I have to do today:
    1. Solve the XError compatibility to use ? without problems
    2. Solve this responsability problem, making CPU ensuring the PC correct position and VM ensuring the PC valid position
    3. Make the fetch and decode methods and test with real ELFs by printing the instructions on terminal

1. SOLVING THE XERROR COMPATIBILITY TO USE ERROR PROPAGATION WITHOUT PROBLEMS:
    - I noticed that only the struct CPU use the struct VM methods, so why not place VMError inside CPUError and exclude GeneralError?
    